>> Jason: Now, the fit and finish part,
they're really sorta polishing things up.
These are some of the details that I
think, if you've never studied typography,
are very easy to overlook.
But once you see them,
you'll never unsee them.
So what I'm gonna show you are some
things about kerning which is
the spacing between letters and ligatures.
So those are features of
the open type specification,
which has enabled us to use these
things both in print and online.
So if you take a look at Moby's Trip and
A Whale of an Afflicted Tale, and
we turn on the open type features,
you'll see a few things.
Between the i and the p in trip, is this
beautiful little ligature connecting them.
In afflicted, the f, f, and
l are joined together and the c and
t is also joined together.
So I'm gonna go back and
look at this again.
Just watch the word afflicted.
See how much more elegant that is?
It just kinda pulls it together a little
bit more, it becomes more of a unit.
It may not be something that you want for
your body copy to have the sorta
more ornate ligatures there, but
it really does make a difference,
just having those details.
And if you look at it in print,
you'll see it everywhere.
So two fs together or an f and
an I, f, f, and l, those
are some of the more common ligatures
that you would see in every day usage.
A lot of fonts actually have
that turned on by default now.
So those things will actually be there.
It is controllable with CSS,
you can turn these things on or off.
Kerning is also something.
So Moby's Trip up top,
I'm gonna do this again.
Watch the spacing between the letters.
See how everything kinda came
together a little bit better?
Not everybody agrees with me, but
I think browsers are actually
kinda lousy at letter spacing.
I think quite often,
if you don't do anything,
browsers will tend to set
type very loosely and
I think that that is also something
that is a little uneven between them.
So when you do have open
type enabled fonts and
you can ensure that kerning is forced on,
you'll get a much nicer layout.
You may still end up deciding on larger
headings to tighten the letter spacing
just a little bit.
Just using like a minus one pixel.
That will kinda bring things
together a little bit more.
That just helps large type form
a little bit more cohesive a unit.
If it's set large and
the letters are really kinda spaced out,
it becomes harder to read.
It slows people down.
Again, just another example
of looking at initial caps.
We've seen this one before.
Just using CSS columns, you're able
to kinda go from two down to one,
just based on breakpoints.
The margins on the block quote down below,
the size of the initial capital, all of
those things are really easy to scale.
There's some libraries out there,
I work a lot with the Drupal
content management system.
Anybody else work with Drupal much?
So there's a module called
Typogrify that you can turn on and
enable for a given input format, and
it will do a few different things for you.
One of the ones that I really love is it
will make sure that all of your quotation
marks and apostrophes are correct.
It replaces all the straight hash
marks with proper quotation marks,
the curly ones, just like they should be,
without you ever having to do anything.
It doesn't even need to have anybody touch
it in the source when you're editing
the content.
It handles it on the output side.
It also does things,
if you watch the end of that paragraph,
enthusiastic support mean the world.
As it gets narrower, you'll notice that,
technically there's space for
the word the on the line above, but
it bumped down with the world
down below because this module is
adding a non-breaking space between
the last two words of every paragraph.
Fixing orphans is one of those things
that magazine editors will get up and
jump up and down on their desk and
hug you if you can actually fix this
automatically across any screen size.
That module and
Drupal makes that really easy.
It's really just turning something on.
Recently I became the co-maintainer of
that and we're working on some updates for
Drupal 8.
So that's actually coming
along a little bit.
But that library is a PHP library that's
been enabled in some WordPress modules,
I know Aaron Gustafson, a while ago,
made an expression engine plug in for it.
Or you can actually just pull it
in on your own, it's just PHP.
So you can build it into any other system.
I also have in here, in a lot of these
projects, widow tamer which is a really
simple JavaScript library that you
can define fixes for any HTML element
you want and decide how many characters
you want to have on any given line.
So that way you could apply
it to headings if you want
to make sure that you have a minimum of
eight characters or something like that so
you don't end up with one short word
that gets bumped down to the next line.
That one, it hesitate a little bit about
that one because it's client side, and
we already have lots of other
JavaScript going on client side, but
it's pretty light weight.
And so if you don't have
access to using a module,
adding something in like this for
a blog or for some reading focused website
really will improve the reading
experience quite a bit.